Men who are anxious to win the favor of a Prince nearlyalways follow the custom of presenting themselves to him withthe possessions they value most, or with things they knowespecially please him; so we often see princes given horses,weapons, cloth of gold, precious stones, and similar ornamentsworthy of their high position. Now, I am anxious to offer myselfto Your Magnificence with some token of my devotion to you,and I have not found among my belongings anything as dear tome or that I value as much as my understanding of the deeds ofgreat men, won by me from a long acquaintance with conteportray affairs and a continuous study of the ancient world;these matters I have very diligently analyzed and pondered fora long time, and now, having summarized them in a little book,I am sending them to Your Magnificence.And althougt consider this work unworthy to be put beforeyou, yet. I am fully confident that you will be kind enough toaccept it, seeing that could not give you a more valuable giftthan the means of being able in a very short space of time tograsp all that I, over so many years and with so much afflictionand peril, have learned and understood. I have not embellishedor crammed this book with rounded periods or big, impressivewords, or with any blandishment or superfluous decoration ofthe kind which many are in the habit of using to describe oradorn what they have produced; for my ambition has beeneither that nothing should distinguish my book, or that it shouldfind favor solely through the variety of its contents and theseriousness of its subject-matter. Nor I hope will it be consideredpresumptuous for a man of low and humble status to dare
discuss and lay down the law about how princes should rule;because, just as men who are sketching the landscape put theselves down in the plain to study the nature of the mountainsand the highlands, and to study the low-lying land they putthemselves high on the mountains, so, to comprehend full thenature of the people, one must be a prince, and to comprehendfully the nature of princes one must be an ordinary citizen.So, Your Magnificence, take this little gift in the spirit inwhich I send it; and if you read and consider it diligently, youwill discover in it my urgent wish that you reach the eminencethat fortune and your other qualities promise you. And if, fromyour lofty peak, Your Magnificence will sometimes glance downto these low-lying regions, you will realize the extent to which,undeservedly, I have to endure the great and unremitting maliceof fortune.
How many kinds of principality there are and theways in which they are acquiredAlI the states, all the dominions under whose authority menhave lived in the past and live now have been and are eitherrepublics or principalities. Principalities are hereditary, withtheir prince's family long established as rulers, or they are new.The new are completely new, as was Milan to Francesco Sforza,or they are like limbs joined to the hereditary state of the princewho acquires them, as is the kingdom of Naples in relation tothe king of Spain. Dominions so acquired are accustomed to beunder a prince, or used to freedom; a prince wins them eitherwith the arms of others or with his own, either by fortune or byprowess.Hereditary principalitiesI shall leave out any discussion of republics, since I discussedthem at length on another occasion. I shall deal only with theprincipality, and I shall follow the order set out above, anddebate how these principalities can be governed and maintained.I say, then, that in hereditary states, accustomed to their.prince's family, there are far fewer difficulties in maintainingone's rule than in new principalities; because it is enough merelynot to neglect the institutions founded by one's ancestors and
then to adapt policy to events. In this way, if the prince isreasonably assiduous he will always maintain his rule, unlesssome extraordinary and inordinate force deprive him of it; andif so deprived, whenever the usurper suffers a setback he willreconquer.We have in Italy, for example, the duke of Ferrara;1 he couldnot withstand the assaults of the Venetians in '84, nor those ofPope Julius in z5 xo, but for other reasons than that he had beenlong established. The fact. is that the natural prince has lessreason and less need to give offense; and so it follows that heshould be more loved; and if he does not provoke hatred byextraordinary vices, it stands to reason that his subjects shouldnaturally be well disposed towards him. And in the antiquityand persistence of his rule memories of innovations and thereasons for them disappear; because one change always leavesa toothing-stone for the next.Composite principalitiesBut in the new principality difficulties do arise. First, if it is notentirely new but a new appendage to an old state (so that theterritory as a whole can be called composite) disorders arisechiefly because of one natural difficulty always encountered innew principalities. What happens is that men willingly changetheir ruler, expecting to fare better. This expectation inducesthem to take up arms against him; but they only deceive theselves, and they learn from experience that they have madematters worse. This follows from another common and naturalnecessity: a prince is always compelled to injure those who have made himthe new ruler, subjecting them to the troops andimposing the endless other hardships which this new conquestentails. As a result you are opposed by all those you haveinjured in occupying the principality, and you cannot keep thefriendship of those who have put you there; you cannot satisfythem in the way they had taken for granted, yet you cannot usestrong medicine on them, as you are in their debt. For always,
no matter how powerful one's armies, in order to enter a countryone needs the goodwill of the inhabitants. It was for these reasons that Louis XII, king of France, speedily occupied Milanand speedily lost it.t On the first occasion Ludovico's own forceswere enough to take the city from him, because the peoplewho had opened the gates to him, finding they had deceivedthemselves in their expectations and as regards the benefits theyhad anticipated, could not stand the affronts they received fromthe newcomer.It is certainly true that when lands that have rebelled arereconquered they are not lost so easily; for the ruler, takingadvantage of the revolt, is less scrupulous in securing himself bypunishing the offenders, probing suspects, strengthening himselfwhere he is weakest. Thus for France to lose Milan all that hadto happen the first time was that a Duke Ludovico shouldrampage on the borders, but for France to lose it a second timethe whole world had to oppose her, and her armies had to bedestroyed or chased out of Italy; and the reasons for this I gaveabove. None the less, both times France lost Milan.The general reasons for the first loss have been discussed. Itremains now to give those for the second, and to see whatremedies were available to the king of France, and what stepscould have been taken by someone in the same straits to maintain his conquest more securely than he did. Now I say thatthose states which when acquired are joined to a state long heldby the conqueror are either of the same country, sharing thesame language, or they are not. When they are, it is a very easymatter to hold on to them, especially when they are not used tofreedom; and to hold them securely it is enough to havedestroyed the line of the former ruling prince. For the rest, solong as their old ways of life are undisturbed and there is nodivergence in customs, men live quietly: as we have seen in thecase of Burgundy, Brittany, Gascony, and Normandy, whichhave been with France for so long. Although here there is somedivergence in language, none the less their customs are similar,and they can easily get along together. If the ruler wants to keephold of his new possessions, he must bear two things in mind:first, that the family of the old prince must be destroyed; next,
that he must change neither their laws nor their taxes. In thisway, in a very short space of time the new principality will berolled into one with the old.But when states are acquired in a province differing in language, in customs, and in institutions, then difficulties arise; andto hold them one must be very fortunate and very assiduous.One of the best, most effective expedients would be for the conqueror to go to live there in person.This course of actionwould make a new possession more secure and more permanent;and this was what the Turk achieved in Greece.2 For all theother measures he took, had he not gone to settle there he wouldhave found it impossible to hold that state. Being on the spot,one can detect trouble at the start and deal with it immediately;if one is absent, it is discerned only when it has grown serious,'and it is then too late. And besides, this policy prevents theconquered territory from being plundered by one's officials. Thesubjects are satisfied because they have direct recourse to theprince; and so they have more reason to love him, ff they wantto be good, and to fear him, if they want to be otherwise. Anyonewishing to invade the state has to think twice about it. So if hesettles there the ruler can lose his new state only with the greatestdifficulty.The other superior expedient is to establish settlements in oneor two places; these will, as it were, fetter the state to you.sunless you establish settlements, you will have to garrison largenumbers of mounted troops and infantry. Settlements do notcost much, and the prince can found them and maintain themat little or no personal expense. He injures only those fromwhom he takes land and houses to give to the new inhabitants,and these victims form a tiny minority, and can never do anyharm since they remain poor and scattered. All the others areleft undisturbed, and so should stay quiet, and as well as thisthey are frightened to do wrong lest what happened to thedispossessed should happen to them. To sum up, settlementsare economical and more faithful, and do less harm; and thosewho are injured cannot hurt you because, as I said, they arescattered and poor. And here it has to be noted that men mustbe either pampered or crushed, because they can get revenge for
small injuries but not for grievous ones. So any injury a princedoes a man should be of such a kind that there is no fear ofrevenge. If, however, instead of establishing settlements theprince sends in troops, expenses are far higher, as all the revenueshave to be devoted to defense and the gain becomes a loss. Theprince does far more injury, because he harms the whole stateby billeting his army in different parts of the country, everyonesuffers from this annoyance, and everybody is turned into anenemy. And those who grow hostile can do him harm, becausethey remain, defeated, in their own homes. In every way, therefore, this means of defense is as useless as colonization is useful.In addition, anyone in a country which differs from his ownin the way I described should make himself the leader andprotector of the smaller neighboring powers, and he shouldendeavor to weaken those which are strong. He should alsotake precautions to check an invasion of the province by aforeigner as powerful as himself. Invariably, the intruder will bebrought in by those who are disaffected, because of excessiveambition or because of fear. Thus the Aetofians once broughtthe Romans into Greece; and in every other country theyinvaded, the Romans were brought in by the inhabitants. Thisis what happens: as soon as a powerful foreigner invades acountry all the weaker powers give him their support, movedby envy of the power which has so far dominated them. So, asfar as these weaker powers are concerned, he has no trouble atall in winning them to his side, because of their own accord theystraight away merge with the state he establishes. All he has towatch is that they do not build up too much strength and toomuch authority; and with his own strength and their support hecan easily hold down those who are powerful and so makehimself, in everything, the master of the country. Whoever doesnot attend carefully to these points will quickly lose what he hasacquired; even while he still holds on he will experience countlessdifficulties and annoyances.The Romans, in the countries they seized, did watch thesematters carefully. They established settlements, supported theweaker powers without increasing their strength, crushed thepowerful, and did not allow any powerful foreigner to win
prestige. The count of Greece provides a good enoughexample. Here, the Romans supported the Achaeans and theAetolians; they crushed the Macedonian kingdom; and theydrove out Antiochus. They never allowed the Achaeans or theAetolians to expand their territories however well they behaved;they never allowed Philip to persuade them into an alliancewithout holding him down; and despite his power, Antiochuswas never granted any authority in Greece. In these instances,the Romans did what all wise rulers must: cope not only withpresent troubles but also with ones likely to arise in future,and assiduously forestall them. When trouble is sensed well inadvance it can easily be remedied; if you wait for it to showitself any medicine will be too late because the disease will havebecome incurable. As the doctors say of a wasting disease, tostart with it is easy to cure but difficult to diagnose; after a time,unless it has been diagnosed and treated at the outset, it becomeseasy to diagnose but difficult to cure. So it is in politics. Politicaldisorders can be quickly healed if they are seen weI1 in advance(and only a prudent ruler has such foresight); when, for lack ofa diagnosis, they are allowed to grow in such a way that everyonecan recognize them, remedies are too late.So the Romans saw when troubles were coming and alwaystook counter-measures. They never, to avoid a war, allowedthem to go unchecked, because they knew that there is noavoiding war; it can only be postponed to the advantage ofothers. They made up their minds to wage war with Philip andAntiochus in Greece,a in order not to have to do so in Italy. Atthe time they could have avoided doing either, but they wouldnot. Nor were the Romans ever tempted to do what we hearevery day on the lips of the wise men of our generation, to makethe most of the present time; rather, they made the most of theirown prowess and prudence. Time sweeps everything along andcan bring good as well as evil, evil as well as good.But let us go back to France, and see if that country hasadopted any of the measures I have been discussing. I shall talkabout Louis, not Charles, and so about a man whose career it hasbeen possible to study more closely because he was entrenched inItaly for a longer time.4 You will see how Louis has done the
opposite of what ought to be done to maintain one's rule in analien country.King Louis was brought into Italy by the ambition of theVenetians, who wanted by this means to win for themselves halfLombardy. I do not mean to condemn the course of action takenby the king; he wanted to get a footing in Italy, he had no alliesthere - on the contrary because of the actions of King Charlesall the gates were barred to him - and so he was forced to makefriends where he could. His policy in this matter would even haveproved successful, provided he had not gone wrong elsewhere.Now, when Lombardy fell into his hands the king immediatelyregained the standing which Charles had lost. Genoa capitulated; the Florentines became his allies; the marquis of Mantua,the duke of Ferrara, the Bentivogli, the countess of Forli, therulers of Faenza, of Pesaro, of Rimini, of Camerino, of Piobino,s the citizens of Lucca, Pisa, Siena, all came forward toseek his friendship. Then the Venetians were in a position torealize how rash they had been. In order to gain two towns inLombardy they had made him, the king, ruler of a third of Italy.Now consider with what little trouble the king could havemaintained his standing in Italy, if he had observed the rules Igave above and kept all those allies of his safe and secure. Therewere many of them, and they were weak and frightened, someof the Church, some of the Venetians; so they were bound tostay by him, and through them he could easily have safeguardedhimself against the powers which remained strong. But nosooner was he in Milan than he did the contrary, helping PopeAlexander to occupy the Romagna. Nor did he realize that bytaking this decision he weakened himself, alienated his alliesand those who had thrown themselves into his arms, andstrengthened the Church by adding so much temporal power toits existing spiritual power, which gives it such authority. Haing made one mistake, he was forced to make others. To frustrate the ambition of Alexander and prevent his becoming rulerof Tuscany he was forced to come down into Italy himself. Notcontent with having made the Church powerful and havingalienated his allies, he then, because he wanted the kingdom ofNaples, divided it with the king of Spain. Whereas to start with
he was master of Italy he now brought in a rival to whom theambitious and the discontented might have recourse. He couldhave left in Naples a king who was in his pay. Instead heexpelled him to put in his place one who could chase him out inturn.The wish to acquire more is admittedly a very natural andcommon thing; and when men succeed in this they are alwayspraised rather than condemned. But when they lack the abilityto do so and yet want to acquire more at all costs, they deservecondemnation for their mistakes. If France could have attackedNaples with her own forces, she should have done so; if not, sheshould not have divided it. And if the partition of Lombardywith the Venetians could be excused, because it gave Louis afoothold in Italy, the other partition deserved to be condemned,because there was no such necessity for it.Louis had, therefore, made these five mistakes: he haddestroyed the weaker powers; increased the power of someonealready powerful in Italy; brought into that country a verypowerful foreigner; stayed away from Italy himself; failed toestablish settlements there. Even these mistakes, if he had lived,need not have been fatal if there had not been a sixth: hisdispossessing the Venetians of their state.8 If he had not madethe Church strong, or brought Spain into Italy, it would havebeen reasonable and necessary to crush the Venetians. But haing taken those steps, he should never have let them be ruined;because while they remained powerful they would always haveprevented the others from moving against Lombardy. TheVenetians would have opposed this unless it gave them controlof Lombardy themselves, and the others would not have wantedto wrest it from France to give it to them. Nor would they havehad the courage to defy both France and the Venetians. If anyoneshould say that King Louis ceded the Romagna' to Alexanderand the kingdom of Naples to Spain in order to escape a war, Iwould reply with the arguments used above, that one mustnever allow disorder to continue so as to escape a war. Anyhowone does not escape: the war is merely postponed to one'sdisadvantage. And if anyone should cite the king's good faith,which he had pledged to the pope, and his promise to undertake
that enterprise in return for having his marriage dissolved anda cardinal's hat given to Rouen, my reply is what I shall say laterconcerning the good faith of princes and the way they shouldkeep their word. King Louis, therefore, lost Lombardy becausehe observed none of the rules observed by others who haveseized countries and determined to hold on to them. Thereis nothing fantastic about this, it is very commonplace andreasonable. I had a word on this subject with Rouen, at Nantes,when Valentino (as Cesare Borgia, son of Pope Alexander,was popularly called) was occupying the Romagna. When thecardinal of Rouen said to me that the Italians did not understandwar, I retorted that the French did not understand statecraft,because, if they understood it, then they would not let theChurch become so great. And the course of events in Italy hasshown how the greatness of the Church and of Spain has beencaused by France, and how the ruin of France has been causedby them. From this we can deduce a general rule, which neveror rarely fails to apply: that whoever is responsible for another'sbecoming powerful ruins himself, because this power is broughtinto being either by ingenuity or by force, and both of these aresuspect to the one who has become powerful.Why the kingdom of Darius conquered by Alexanderdid not rebel against his successors after his deathOne could well wonder, after having considered all the difficulties involved in holding a newly acquired state, how it wasthat when Alexander, who had in a few years become ruler ofall Asia,i died with his conquest scarcely completed, there wasnot, as might have been expected, a general uprising. Instead,Alexander's successors ruled securely; and in their governmentthe only difficulty arose from their own ambitions and rivalries.My answer to this problem is that all principalities known tohistory are governed in one of two ways, either by a prince towhom everyone is subservient and whose ministers, with hisfavor and permission, help govern, or by a prince and by nobles
disappearing, grows in intensity. Those who use the first methodcan, with God and with men, somewhat enhance their position,as did Agathocles; the others cannot possibly stay in power.So it should be noted that when he seizes a state the new rulermust determine all the injuries that he will need to inflict. Hemust inflict them once for all, and not have to renew them everyday, and in that way he will be able to set men's minds at restand win them over to him when he confers benefits. Whoeveracts otherwise, either through timidity or misjudgment isalways forced to have the knife ready in his hand and he cannever depend on his subjects because they, suffering fresh andcontinuous violence, can never feel secure with regard to him.Violence must be inflicted once for all; people will then forgetwhat it tastes like and so be less resentful. Benefits must beconferred gradually; and in that way they will taste better.Above all, a prince must live with his subjects in such a way thatno development, either favorable or adverse, makes him varyhis conduct. For, when adversity brings the need for it, there isno time to inflict harm; and the favors he may confer areprofitless, because they are seen as being forced, and so theyearn no thanks.The constitutional principalityBut now we come to the other case, where a private citizenbecomes the ruler of his country neither by crime nor by anyother outrageous act of violence but by the favor of his fellowcitizens (and this we can call a constitutional principality, tobecome the ruler of which one needs neither prowess alone norfortune, but rather a lucky astuteness). I sag that one becomesa prince in this case with the favor of the people or of thenobles.1 These two different dispositions are found in every city;and the people are everywhere anxious not to be dominated oroppressed by the nobles, and the nobles are out to dominateand oppress the people. These opposed ambitions bring aboutone of three results: a principality, a free city, or anarchy.
A principality is created either by the people or by the nobles,according to whether the one or the other of these two classesis given the opportunity. What happens is that when the noblessee they cannot withstand the people, they start to increase thestanding of one of their own numbers, and they make him princein order to be able to achieve their own ends under his cloak. Thepeople in the same way, when they see they cannot withstand thenobles, increase the standing of one of themselves and makehim prince in order to be protected by his authority. A man who,becomes prince with the help of the nobles finds it more difficultto maintain his position than One who does so with the help of the people. As prince, he finds himself surrounded by manywho believe they are his equals, and because of that he cannotcommand or manage them the way he wants. A man whobecomes prince by favor of the people finds himself standingalone, and he has near him either no one or very few notprepared to take orders. In addition, it is impossible to satisfythe nobles honorably, without doing violence to the interestsof others; but this can be done as far as the people are concerned.The people are more honest in their intentions than the noblesare, because the latter want to oppress the people, whereas theywant only not to be oppressed. Moreover, a prince can nevermake himself safe against a hostile people: there are too manyof them. He can make himself safe against the nobles, who arefew. The worst that can happen to a prince when the people arehostile is for him to be deserted; but from the nobles, if hostile,he has to fear not only desertion but even active opposition. Thenobles have more foresight and are more astute, they always actin time to safeguard their interests, and they take sides with theone whom they expect to win. Again, a prince must always livewith the same people, but he can well do without the nobles,since he can make and unmake them every day, increasing andlowering their standing at will.To clarify the discussion further, I say that there are two mainconsiderations to be remembered in regard to the nobles: eitherthey conduct themselves in such a way that they come to dependentirely on your fortunes, or they do not. Those who becomedependent, and are not rapacious, must be honored and loved;
those who remain independent of you do so for two differentreasons. They may do so because they are pusillanimous andnaturally lacking in spirit; ff so you should make use of them,especially those who are capable of giving sensible advice, sincethey will respect you when you are doing well, and you willhave nothing to fear from them in times of adversity. But whenthey deliberately and for reasons of ambition remain independent of you, it is a sign that they are more concerned aboutthemselves than about you. Against nobles such as these, aprince must safeguard himself, fearing them as if they were hisdeclared enemies, because in times of adversity they will alwayshelp to ruin him.A man who is made a prince by the favor of the people mustwork to retain their friendship; and this is easy for him becausethe people ask only not to be oppressed. But a man who hasbecome prince against the will of the people and by the favorof the nobles should, before anything else, try to win the peopleover; this too is easy if he takes them under his protection. Whenmen receive favors from someone they expected to do them it,they are under a greater obligation to their benefactor; just sothe people can in an instant become more amicably disposedtowards the prince than if he had seized power by their favor.And there are many ways in which a prince can win them over.These vary according to circumstances, so no definite rule canbe given and I shall not deal with them here. I shall only concludethat it is necessary for a prince to have the friendship of thepeople; otherwise he has no remedy in times of adversity.Nabis, prince of the Spartans, withstood the whole of Greeceand a triumphant Roman army, and successfully defended hiscountry and his own authority against them.z All he had to do,when danger threatened, was to take steps against a few of hissubjects; but this would not have been enough had the peoplebeen hostile to him. Let no one contradict this opinion of minewith that trite proverb, that he who builds on the people buildson mud. That may be so when a private citizen bases his poweron the people and takes it for granted that the people will rescuehim if he is in danger from enemies or from the magistrates. (Inthis case, he could often find he had made a mistake, as happened
with the Gracchi in Rome and messer Giorgio Scali in Florence.)But if it is a prince who builds his power on the people, one whocan command and is a man of courage, who does not despair inadversity, who does not fail to take precautions, and who winsgeneral allegiance by his personal qualities and the institutionshe establishes, he will never be let down by the people; and hewill be found to have established his power securely.Principalities usually come to grief when the transition isbeing made from limited power to absolutism. Princes takingthis step rule either directly or through magistrates. In the lattercase, their position is weaker and more dangerous, because theyrely entirely on the will of those citizens who have been put inoffice; and these, especially in times of adversity, can very easilydepose them either by positive action against them or by notobeying them. And when danger comes, the prince has no timeto seize absolute authority, because the citizens and subjects,accustomed to taking orders from the magistrates, will not takethem from him in a crisis. In disturbed times, also, men whomthe prince can trust will be hard to find. So such a prince cannotrely on what he has experienced in times of tranquillity, whenthe citizens have need of his government When things are quiet,everyone dances attendance, everyone makes promises, andeverybody would die for him so long as death is far off. But intimes of adversity, when the state has need of its citizens, thereare few to be found And this test of loyalty is all the moredangerous since it can be made only once Therefore a wiseprince must devise ways by which his citizens are always and inall circumstances dependent on him and on his authority: andthen they will always be faithful to him.How the strength of every principality shouldbe measuredThere is another consideration rightly to be borne in mind wheninquiring into the characteristics of these principalities: and thatis whether a prince has territory such that, in case of necessity,
The things for which men, and especially, princes,are praised or blamedIt now remains for us to see how a prince must regulate hisconduct towards his subjects or his allies.I I know that this hasoften been written about before, and so I hope it will not bethought presumptuous for me to do so, as, especially in discussing this subject, I draw up an original set of rules. But sincemy intention is to say something that will prove of practical use to the inquirer, I have thought it proper to represent things asthey are in a real truth, rather than as they are imagined. Manyhave dreamed up republics and principalities which have neverin truth been known to exist; the gulf between how one shouldlive and how one does live is so wide that a man who neglectswhat is actually done for what should be done moves towardsself-destruction rather than self-preservation. The fact is that aman who wants to act virtuously in every way necessarily comesto grief among so many who are not virtuous. Therefore if aprince wants to maintain his rule he must be prepared not to bevirtuous, and to make use of this or not according to need.So leaving aside imaginary things about a prince, and referringonly to those which truly exist, I say that whenever men arediscussed and especially princes (who are more exposed toview), they are judged for various qualities which earn themeither praise or condemnation. Some, for example, are held tobe generous, and others miserly (I use the Tuscan word ratherthan the word avaricious:z we also call a man who is mean withwhat he possesses, miserly, whereas avaricious applies also toa man who wants to plunder others). Some are held to bebenefactors, others are called grasping; some cruel, some copassionate; one man faithless, another faithful; one man effeminate and cowardly, another fierce and courageous; one mancourteous, another proud; one man lascivious, another chaste;one guileless, another crafty; one stubborn, another flexible;one grave, another frivolous; one religious, another skeptical;and so forth. I know everyone will agree that it would be most
laudable if a prince possessed all the qualities deemed to be goodamong those I have enumerated. But, because of conditions inthe world, princes cannot have those qualities, or observe themcompletely. So a prince has of necessity to be so prudent that heknows how to escape the evil reputation attached to those viceswhich could lose him his state, and how to avoid those viceswhich are not so dangerous, if he possibly can; b uh if he cannot,he need not worry so much about the latter. And then, he mustnot flinch from being blamed for vices which are necessary forsafeguarding the state. This is because, taking everything intoaccount, he will find that some of the things that appear to bevirtues will, if he practices them, ruin him, and some of the thingsthat appear to be vices.will bring him security and prosperity.Generosity and parsimonySo, starting with the first of the qualities I enumerated above, Isay it would be splendid if one had a reputation for generosity;none the less if you do in fact earn a reputation for generosityyou will come to grief. This is because ft. your generosity is goodand sincere it may pass unnoticed and will not save you frombeing reproached for its opposite. If you want to sustain at, reputation for generosity, therefore, you have to be ostentatiously lavish; and a prince acting in that fashion will soonsquander all his resources, only to be forced in the end, if hewants to maintain his reputation, to lay excessive burdens onthe people, to impose extortionate taxes, and to do everythingelse he can to raise money. This will start to make his subjectshate him, and, since he will have impoverished himself, he willbe generally despised. As a result, because of this generosity ofhis, having injured many and rewarded few, he will be vulnerable to the first minor setback, and the first real danger heencounters will bring him to grief. When he realizes this andtries to retrace his path he will immediately be reputed a miser.So because a prince cannot practice the virtue of generosityin such a way that he is noted for it, except to his cost, he should
if he is prudent not mind being called a miser. In time he will berecognized as being essentially a generous man, seeing thatbecause of his parsimony his existing revenues are enough forhim, he can defend himself against an aggressor, and he canembark on campaigns without burdening the people. So heproves himself generous to all those from whom he takes nothing, and they are innumerable, and miserly towards all those towhom he gives nothing, and they are few. In our own timesgreat things have been accomplished only by those who havebeen held miserly, and the others have met disaster. Pope JuliusII made use of a reputation for generosity to win the papacybur subsequently he made no effort to maintain this reputation,because he wanted to be able to finance his wars. The presentking of France has been able to wage so many wars withouttaxing his subjects excessively only because his long-standingparsimony enabled him to meet the additional expensesinvolved. Were the present king of Spain1 renowned for hisgenerosity he would not have started and successfully concludedso many enterprises.So a prince must think little of it, if he incurs the name ofmiser, so as not to rob his subjects, to be able to defend himself,not to become poor and despicable, not to be forced to growrapacious. Miserliness is one of those vices which sustain hisrule. Someone may object: Caesar came to power by virtue ofhis generosity, and many others, because they practiced andwere known for their generosity, have risen to the very highestpositions. My answer to this is as follows. Either you are alreadya prince, or you are on the way to becoming one. In the firstcase, your generosity will be to your cost; in the second, it iscertainly necessary to have a reputation for generosity. Caesarwas one of those who wanted to establish his own rule overRome; but if, after he had established it, he had remained aliveand not moderated his expenditure he would have fallen frompower.Again, someone may retort: there have been many princeswho have won great successes with their armies, and who havehad the reputation of being extremely generous. My reply tothis is: the prince gives away what is his own or his subjects', or
else what belongs to others. In the first case he should be frugal;in the second, he should indulge his generosity to the full. Theprince who campaigns with his armies, who lives by pillaging,sacking, and extortion, disposes of what belongs to aliens; andhe must be open-handed, otherwise the soldiers would refuse tofollow him. And you can be more liberal with what does notbelong to you or your subjects, as Caesar, Cyrus, and Alexanderwere. Giving away what belongs to strangers in no way affectsyour standing at home;rather it increases it. You hurt yourselfonly when you give away what is your own. There is nothing soself-defeating as generosity: in the act of practicing it, you losethe ability to do so, and you become either poor and despisedor, seeking to escape poverty, rapacious and hated. A princemust try to avoid, above all else, being despised and hated; andgenerosity results in your being both. Therefore it is wiser toincur the reputation of being a miser, which brings forth ignominy but not hatred, than to be forced by seeking a name forgenerosity to incur a reputation for rapacity, which brings youhatred as well as ignominy.XVlICruelty and compassion; and whether it is betterto be loved than feared, or the reverseTaking others of the qualities I enumerated above, I say that aprince must want to have a reputation for compassion ratherthan for cruelty: none the less, he must be careful that he doesnot make bad use of compassion. Cesare Borgia was accountedcruel; nevertheless, this cruelty of his reformed the Romagna,brought it unity, and restored order and obedience. On reflection, it will be seen that there was more compassion in Cesarethan in the Florentine people, who, to escape being called cruel,allowed Pistoia to be devastated. So a prince must not worry ifhe incurs reproach for his cruelty so long as he keeps his subjectsunited and loyal. By making an example or two he will provemore compassionate than those who, being too compassionate,allow disorders which lead to murder and rapine. These nearly
always harm the whole community, whereas executions orderedby a prince only affect individuals. A new prince, of all rulers,finds it impossible to avoid a reputation for cruelty, because ofthe abundant dangers inherent in a newly won state. Vergil,through the mouth of Dido, says:
None the less, a prince must be slow to believe allegationsand to take action, and must watch that he does not come to beafraid of his own shadow; his behavior must be tempered byhumanity and prudence so that over-confidence does not makehim rash or excessive distrust make him unbearable.From this arises the following question: whether it is betterto be loved than feared, or the reverse. The answer is that onewould like to be both the one and the other; but because it isdifficult to combine them, it is far better to be feared than,lovedif you cannot be both. One can make this generalization aboutmen: they are ungrateful, fickle, liars, and deceivers, they shundanger and are greedy for profit; while you treat them well, theyare yours. They would shed their blood for you, risk theirproperty, their lives, their sons, so long, as I said above, asdanger is remote; but when you are in danger they turn away.Any prince who has come to depend entirely on promises andhas taken no other precautions ensures his own ruin; friendshipwhich is bought with money and not with greatness andnobility of mind is paid for, but it does not last and it yieldsnothing. Men worry less about doing an injury to one whomakes himself loved than to one who makes himself feared. Forlove is secured by a bond of gratitude which men, wretchedcreatures that they are, break when it is to their advantage todo so; but fear is strengthened by a dread of punishment whichis always effective.The prince must none the less make himself feared in such away that, if he is not loved, at least he escapes being hated. Forfear is quite compatible with an absence of hatred; and theprince can always avoid hatred if he abstains from the property
of his subjects and citizens and from their women. If, even so, itproves necessary to execute someone, this is to be done onlywhen there is proper justification and manifest reason for it. Butabove all a prince must abstain from the property of others;because men sooner forget the death of t'heir father than the lossof their patrimony. It is always possible to find pretexts forconfiscating someone's property; and a prince who starts to liveby rapine always finds pretexts for seizing what belongs toothers. On the other hand, pretexts for executing someone areharder to find and they are sooner gone.However, when a prince is campaigning with his soldiers andis in command of a large army then he need not worry abouthaving a reputation for cruelty; because, without such a reputation, no army was ever kept united and disciplined. Amongthe admirable achievements of Hannibal is included this: thatalthough he led a huge army, made up of countless differentraces, on foreign campaigns, there was never any dissension,either among the troops themselves or against their leader,whether things were going well or badly. For this, his inhumancruelty was wholly responsible. It was this, along with his countless other qualities, which made him feared and respected by hissoldiers. If it had not been for his cruelty, his other qualifieswould not have been enough. The historians, having givenlittle thought to this, on the one hand admire what Hannibalachieved, and on the other condemn what made his achievements possible.That his other qualities would not have been enough bythemselves can be proved by looking at Scipio, a man unique in qhis own time and through all recorded history. His armiesmutinied against him in Spain, and the only reason for this washis excessive leniency, which allowed his soldiers more licensethan was good for military discipline. Fabius Maximusreproached him for this in the Senate and called him a corrupterof the Roman legions. Again, when the Locrians were plunderedby one of Scipio's officers,3 he neither gave them satisfactionnor punished his officer's insubordination; and this was allbecause of his being too lenient by nature. By way of excuse forhim some senators argued that many men were better at not
making mistakes themselves than at correcting them in others.But in time Scipio's lenient nature would have spoilt his fameand glory had he continued to indulge it during his command;when he lived under orders from the Senate, however, this fatalcharacteristic of his was not only concealed but even broughthim glory.So, on this question of being loved or feared, I conclude thatsince some men love as they  lease but fear when the princepleases, a wise prince should rely on what he controls, not o.nwhat he cannot control. He must only endeavor, as I said, toescape being hated.XVIIIHow princes should honor their wordEveryone realizes how praiseworthy it is for a prince to honorhis word and to be straightforward rather than crafty in hisdealings; none the less contemporary experience shows thatprinces who have achieved great things have been those whohave given their word lightly, who have known how to trickmen with their cunning, and who, in the end, have overcomethose abiding by honest principles.You must understand, therefore, that there are two ways of"fighting: by law or by force. The first way is natural to men, andthe second to beasts. But as the first way often proves inadequateone must have recourse to the second. So a prince mustunderstand how to make a nice use of the beast and the man.The ancient writers taught princes about this by an allegory,when they described how Achilles and many other princes ofthe ancient world were sent to be brought up by Chiron, thecentaur, so that he might train them his way. All the allegorymeans, in making the teacher half beast and half man, is that aprince must know how to act according to the nature of both,and that he cannot survive otherwise.So, as a prince is forced to know how to act like a beast, hemust learn from the fox and the lion; because the lion is defenseless against traps and a fox is defenseless against wolves. Therefore
one must be a fox in order to recognize traps, and a lion tofrighten off wolves. Those who simply act like lions are stupid.So it follows that a prudent ruler cannot, and must not, honorhis word when it places him at a disadvantage and when thereasons for which he made his promise no longer exist. If allmen were good, this precept would not be good; but becausemen are wretched creatures who would not keep their word to you, you need not keep your word to them. And no prince everlacked good excuses to color his bad faith. One could giveinnumerable modern instances of this, showing how many pactsand promises have been made null and void by the bad faith ofprinces: those who have known best how to imitate the fox havecome off best. But one must know how to color one's actionsand to be a great liar and deceiver. Men are so simple, and somuch creatures of circumstance, that the deceiver will alwaysfind someone ready to be deceived.There is one fresh example I do not want to omit. AlexanderVI never did anything, or thought of anything, other than deceiving men; and he always found victims for his deceptions. Therenever was a man capable of such convincing asseverations, orso ready to swear to the truth of something, who would honorhis word less. None the less his deceptions always had the resulthe intended, because he was a past master in the art.A prince, therefore, need not necessarily have all the goodqualities I mentioned above, but should certainly appear tohave them. I would even go so far as to say that if he has thesequalities and always behaves accordingly he will find themharmful; if he only appears to have them they will render himservice. He should appear to be compassionate, faithful to hisword, kind, guileless, and devout. And indeed he should be so.But his disposition should be such that, if he needs to be theopposite, he knows how. you must realize this: that a prince, and especially a new prince, cannot observe all those thingswhich give men a reputation for virtue, because in order tomaintain his state he is often forced to act in defiance of goodfaith, of charity, of kindness, of religion. And so he should havea flexible disposition, varying as fortune and circumstancesdictate. As I said above, he should not deviate from what is
good, if that is possible, but he should know how to do evil, ifthat is necessary.A prince, then, must be very careful not to say a word whichdoes not seem inspired by the five qualities I mentioned earlier.l-o those seeing and hearing him, he should appear a man ofcompassion, a man of good faith, a man of integrity, a kind anda religious man. And there is nothing so important as to seemto have this last quality. Men in general judge by their eyesrather than by their hands; because everyone is in a position towatch, few are in a position to come in close touch with you.Everyone sees what you appear to be, few experience what youreally are. And those few dare not gainsay the many who arebacked by the majesty of the state. In the actions of all men, andespecially of princes, where there is no court of appeal, onejudges by the result. So let a prince set about the task of conquering, and maintaining his state; his methods will always be judgedhonorable and will be universally praised. The common peopleare always impressed by appearances and results. In this context,there are only common people, and there is no leeway for thefew when the many are firmly sustained) A certain contemporary ruler, whom it is better not to name,2 never preaches anthing except peace and good faith; and he is an enemy of bothone and the other, and if he had ever honored either of themhe would have lost either his standing or his state many timesover.The need to avoid contempt and hatredNow, having talked about the most important of the qualitiesenumerated above, I want to discuss the others briefly underthis generalization: that the prince should, as I have alreadysuggested, determine to avoid anything which will make himhated and despised. So long as he does so, he will have donewhat he should and he will run no risk whatsoever if he isreproached for the other vices I mentioned. He will be hatedabove all if, as I said, he is rapacious and aggressive with regard
to the property and the women of his subjects. He must refrainfrom these. As long as he does not rob the great majority oftheir property or their honor, they remain content. He thenhas to contend only with the ambition of a few, and that can bedealt with easily and in a variety of ways. He will be despisedif he has a reputation for being fickle, frivolous, effeminate,cowardly, irresolute; a prince should avoid this like the plagueand strive to demonstrate in his actions grandeur, courage,sobriety, strength. When settling disputes between his subjects,he should ensure that his judgement is irrevocable; and he shouldbe so regarded that no one ever dreams of trying to deceive ortrick him.The prince who succeeds in having himself thus regarded ishighly esteemed and against a man who is highly esteemedconspiracy is difficult, and open attack is difficult, provided heis recognized as a great man, who is respected by his subjects.There are two things a prince must fear: internal subversionfrom his subjects; and external aggression by foreign powers.Against the latter, his defense lies in being well armed andhaving good allies; and if he is well armed he will always havegood allies. In addition, domestic affairs will always remainunder control provided that relations with external powersare under control and if indeed they were not disturbed by aconspiracy. Even if there is disturbance abroad, if the prince hasordered his government and lived as I said, and if he does notcapitulate, he will always repulse every onslaught, just as I saidNabis the Spartan did. Now, as far as his subjects are concerned,when there is no disturbance abroad the prince's chief fear mustbe a secret conspiracy. He can adequately guard against this ifhe avoids being hated or scorned and keeps the people satisfied:this, as I have said above at length, is crucial. One of the mostpowerful safeguards a prince can have against conspiracies is toavoid being hated by the populace. This is because the conspirator always thinks that by killing the prince he will satisfy thepeople; but if he thinks that he will outrage the people, he willnever have the courage to go ahead with his enterprise, becausethere are countless obstacles in the path of a conspirator. Asexperience shows, there have been many conspiracies but few
the duke of Milan, and so forth who have lost their states in ourown times. If we do so, we shall find that they shared, fist, acommon weakness in regard to their military organizations, forthe reasons fully discussed above. Then, it will be found thatsome of them incurred the hostility of the people or, if they hadthe people on their side, they did not know how to keep theallegiance of the nobles. If they are not undermined in one ofthese ways, states which are robust enough to keep an army inthe field cannot be lost. Philip of Macedon {not the father ofAlexander but the one who was conquered by Tiros Quintius)ruled a minor dominion in comparison with the greatness of theRomans who attacked him with Greek auxiliaries. None theless, as he was a military man, who knew how to contentthe people and keep the allegiance of the nobles, he sustainedthe war against them for many years; and although at the endhe lost control of some cities, he still kept his kingdom.So these princes of ours, whose power had been establishedmany years, may not blame fortune for their losses. Their ownindolence was to blame, because, having never imagined whenrimes were quiet that they could change (and this is a commonfailing of mankind, never to anticipate a storm when the sea iscalm), when adversity came their first thoughts were of flightand not of resistance. They hoped that the people, revolted bythe outrages of the conqueror, would recall them. Now thispolicy, when all else fails, is all to the good. But it is wrong tohave neglected other precautions in that hope: we do not findmen falling down just because they expect to find someonehelping them up. It may not happen; and, if it does happen, itleaves you unsafe because your expedient was cowardly and notbased on your own actions. The only sound, sure, and enduringmethods of defense are those based on your own actions andprowess.
How far human affairs are governed by fortune,and bow fortune can be opposedI am not unaware that many have held and hold the opinionthat events are controlled by fortune and by God in such a waythat the prudence of men cannot modify them, indeed, thatmen have no influence whatsoever. Because of this, they wouldconclude that there is no point in sweating over things, but thatone should submit to the rulings of chance. This opinion hasbeen more widely held in our own times, because of the greatchanges and variations, beyond human imagining, which wehave experienced and experience every day. Sometimes, whenthinking of this, I have myself inclined to this same opinion.None the less, so as not to rule out our free will, I believe that itis probably true that fortune is the arbiter of half the things wedo, leaving the other half or so to be controlled by ourselves. Icompare fortune to one of those violent rivers which, when theyare enraged, flood the plains, tear down trees and buildings,wash soil from one place to deposit it in another. Everyone fleesbefore them, everybody yields to their impetus, there is nopossibility of resistance. Yet although such is their nature, itdoes not follow that when they are flowing quietly one cannottake precautions, constructing dykes and embankments so thatwhen the river is in flood they would keep to one channel ortheir impetus be less wild and dangerous. So it is with fortune.She shows her potency where there is no well-regulated powerto resist her, and her impetus is felt where she knows there areno embankments and dykes buck to restrain her. If you considerItaly, the theatre of those changes and variations I mentioned,which first appeared here, you will see that she is a countrywithout embankments and without dykes: for if Italy had beenadequately reinforced, like Germany, Spain, and France, eitherthis flood would not have caused the great changes it has, or itwould not have swept in at all.I want what I have said to suffice, in general terms, on thequestion of how to oppose fortune. But, confining myself now
to particular circumstances, I say that we see that some princesflourish one day and come to grief the next, without appearingto have changed in character or any other way. This I believearises, first, for the reasons discussed at length earlier on,namely, that those princes who are utterly dependent on fortunecome to grief when their fortune changes. I also believe that theone who adapts his policy to the times prospers, and likewisethat the one whose policy clashes with the demands of the timesdoes not. It can be observed that men use various methods inpursuing their own personal objectives, that is glory and riches.One man proceeds with circumspection, another impetuously;one uses violence, another stratagem; one man goes about thingspatiently, another does the opposite; and yet everyone, for allthis diversity of method, can reach his objective. It can also beobserved that with two circumspect men, one will achieve hisend, the other not; and likewise two men succeed equally wellwith different methods, one of them being circumspect and theother impetuous. This results from nothing else except the extentto which their methods are or are not suited to the nature of thetimes. Thus it happens that, as I have said, two men, workingin different ways, can achieve the same end, and of two menworking in the same way one gets what he wants and theother does not. This also explains why prosperity is ephemeral;because if a man behaves with patience and circumspection andthe time and circumstances are such that this method is calledfor, he will prosper; but if time and circumstances change hewill be ruined because he does not change his policy. Nor do wefind any man shrewd enough to know how to adapt his policyin this way; either because he cannot do otherwise than what isin character or because, having always prospered by proceedingone way, he cannot persuade himself to change. Thus a manwho is circumspect, when circumstances demand impetuousbehavior, is unequal to the task, and so he comes to grief. If hechanged his character according to the time and circumstances,then his fortune would not change.Pope Julius II was impetuous in everything; and he found thetime and circumstances so favorable to his way of proceedingthat he always met with success. Consider his first campaign,
against Bologna, when messer Giovanni Benfivogli was stillliving. The Venerians mistrusted it: so did the king of Spain; andJulius was still arguing about the enterprise with France. Nonethe less, with typical forcefulness and impetuosity, he launchedthe expedition in person. This move disconcerted and arrestedSpain and the Venetians, the latter because they were afraid andthe former because of the king's ambition to reconquer all thekingdom of Naples. On the other hand, he drew the king ofFrance after him. This was because the king, seeing Julius go intoaction, and anxious for his support in subduing the Venetians,decided he could not refuse him troops without doing him amanifest disservice. With that impetuous move of his, therefore,Julius achieved what no other pontiff, with the utmost humanprudence, would have achieved. Because had Julius delayedsetting out from Rome until all his plans and negotiations werecompleted, as any other pontiff would have done, he wouldnever have succeeded. The king of France would have found ahundred and one excuses, and the others would have inspiredJulius with a hundred and one fears. I shall not discuss his otherdeeds, which were all like this and which all met with success.The brevity of his pontifical fife did not let him experience thecontrary. If there had come a time when it was necessary forhim to act with circumspection he would have come to grief: hewould never have acted other than in character.I conclude, therefore, that as fortune is changeable whereasmen are obstinate in their Ways, men prosper so long as fortuneand policy are in accord, and when there is a clash they fail Ihold strongly to this: that it is better to be impetuous thancircumspect; because fortune is a woman and if she is to besubmissive it is necessary to beat and coerce her. Experience,shows that she is more often subdued by men who do this thanby those who act coldly. Always, being a woman, she favorsyoung men, because they are less circumspect and more ardent,and because they command her with greater audacity.
Exhortation to liberate Italy from the barbariansAfter deliberating on all the things discussed above, I askedmyself whether in present-day Italy the times were propitiousto honor a new prince, and whether the circumstances existedhere which would make it possible for a prudent and capableman to introduce a new order, bringing honor to himself andprosperity to all the Italians. Well, I believe that so many thingsconspire to favor a new prince, that I cannot imagine thereever was a time more suitable than the present. And if, as I said,the Israelites had to be enslaved in Egypt for Moses to emergeas theft forceful leader; if the Persians had to be oppressedby the Medes so that the greatness of Cyrus could be recognized;if the Athenians had to be scattered to demonstrate the excellence of Theseus: then, at the present time, in order to discoverthe worth of an Italian spirit, Italy had to be brought to herpresent extremity. She had to be more enslaved than theHebrews, more oppressed than the Persians, more widelyscattered than the Athenians; leaderless, lawless, crushed,despoiled, torn, overrun; she had to have endured every kind ofdesolation. And although before now there was.a man in whom somespark seemed to show that he was ordained by God to redeemthe country,1 none the less it was seen how afterwards, at thevery height of his career, he was rejected by fortune. So now,left lifeless, Italy is waiting to see who can be the one to heal herwounds, put an end to the sacking of Lombardy, to extortionin the Kingdom and in Tuscany, and cleanse those sores whichhave now been festering for so long. See how Italy beseechesGod to send someone to save her from those barbarous crueltiesand outrages; see how eager and willing the country is to followa banner, if only someone will raise it. And at the present timeit is impossible to see in what she can place more hope than inyour illustrious House, which, with its fortune and prowess,favored by God and by the Church, of which it is now thehead, can lead Italy to her salvation. The task will not be very
hard, if you will call to mind the actions and lives of the men Ihave mentioned." These men may be exceptional and remarkable; they were men none the less, and each of them had lessopportunity than is offered now. Their enterprise was neithermore just nor easier, and God was no more their friend than heis yours. There is great justice in our cause: There is the greatest readiness, and where that is sothere cannot be great difficulty, provided only your House willemulate the methods of those I have singled out for admiration.As well as this, unheard-of wonders are to be seen, performedby God: the sea is divided, a cloud has shown you the way,water has gushed from the rock, it has rained manna; all thingshave conspired to your greatness. The rest is up to you. Goddoes not want to do everything Himself, and take away fromus our free will and our share of the glory which belongsIt is not to be marveled at that none of the Italians I havenamed has succeeded in doing what, it is hoped, your illustriousHouse will do, or that in so many revolutions in Italy and somany martial campaigns it has always seemed that our militaryprowess has been extinguished. This is because the old militarysystems were bad and there has been no one who knew how toestablish a new one. And nothing brings a man greater honorthan the new laws and new institutions he establishes. Whenthese are soundly based and bear the mark of greatness, theymake him revered and admired. Now, in Italy the opportunitiesare not wanting for thorough reorganization. Here we wouldfind greater prowess among those who follow, were it notlacking among the leaders. Look at the duels and the combatsbetween a few, how the Italians are superior in strength, in skill,in inventiveness; but when it is a matter of armies, they do notcompare. All this is because of the weakness of the leaders.Those who are capable are not obeyed. Everyone imagines he iscompetent, and hitherto no one has had the competence todominate the others by his prowess and good fortune. As aresult of this, over so long a time, in so many wars during thepast twenty years, when there has been an all-Italian army it has
always given a bad account of itself, as witness the battles ofTaro, then Alessandria, Capua, Genoa, VailS., Bologna, andMestre.4Therefore if your illustrious House wants to emulate thoseeminent men who saved their countries, before all else it isessential for it, as the right basis for every campaign, to raise acitizen army; for there can be no more loyal, more true, or bettertroops. Taken singly, these troops are good; acting as a unitedarmy, when they find themselves under the command of theirown prince and honored and maintained by him, they are stillbetter. It is necessary, therefore, to raise such an army, in orderto base our defense against the invaders on Italian strength.Although the Swiss and Spanish infantry may be considered'formidable, none the less there are faults in both which wouldenable a third kind of army not only to hold them in battlebut to be sure of conquering. The Spaniards cannot withstand,cavalry, and the Swiss have cause to fear infantrymen who meetthem in combat with a determination equal tO their own. Thuslit has been found, and experience will prove, that the Spaniards'cannot withstand French cavalry and the Swiss succumb toSpanish infantry. There may have been no complete demonstration of this latter assertion, but there was some indicationof its truth at the battle of Ravenna, where Spanish infantrytroops clashed with the German battalions, which adopt thesame line of battle as the Swiss. In the encounter, the Spaniards,making good use of their bucklers, with great agility thrust theirway between and under the German pikes, and attacked withimpunity while the Germans were defenseless. If it had not beenfor the cavalry which charged them, the Spaniards would haveannihilated the Germans.s So, having grasped the defects ofthese Swiss and Spanish infantry, you can develop a new type,capable of withstanding cavalry and undaunted by other infantry. This will be ensured by raising new armies and employingnew formations. It is things of this kind which, when newlyintroduced, bring a new prince greatness and prestige.In order therefore that Italy, after so long a time, may beholdits savior, this opportunity must not be let slip. And I cannotexpress with what love he would be welcomed in all those
provinces which have suffered from these foreign inundations,with what thirst for vengeance, with what resolute loyalty, withwhat devotion and tears. What doors would be closed to him?What people would deny him their obedience? What envyshould stand in his way? What Italian would refuse him allegiance? This barbarous tyranny stinks in everyone's nostrils. Letyour illustrious House undertake this task, therefore, with thecourage and hope which belong to just enterprises, so that,under your standard, our country may be ennobled, and underyour auspices what Petrarch said may come to pass: